doc: Add  How to isolate workload using cpusets (#97)
canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs: docs/how-to/using-cpusets.md

Reviewer: i suggest renaming the file name to be more specific which would help avoid naming conflicts in future.

E.g. `isolate-workload-cpusets.md`

Author: Done here: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/97/commits/095a8ad8949c2077396bb36aec9e8feccfbde53b

Configurations need to be in subdirectories, but these do not exist by default.
They can be created with these commands:

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/init.scope.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/
```
Then we create the files for the `init.scope`, `system.slice` and `user.slice`:

```{note}
We will prefix the name of the configuration files with `50-` because systemd processes the files in lexicographical order (sorted alphabetically).
Prefixing files with numbers ensures a predictable loading sequence.
This way, a file like `50-cpu-shielding.conf` will override settings from `10-defaults.conf` but can still be overridden by a file named `60-custom.conf`.
```

Now that the directories are available, create the following three configuration files:
- `/etc/systemd/system/init.scope.d/50-cpu-shielding.conf` for the init scope with the following content:
```
[Scope]
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

- `/etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/50-cpu-shielding.conf` and `/etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/50-cpu-shielding.conf` with the following:
```
[Slice]
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

> Finally, create a new config file for the slice that will be used by our workload, with remaining CPU. Add the following to `/etc/systemd/system/custom-workload.slice`:

Author: Done https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/97/commits/dd906bf5068fb34c22d05ef3577ad01dcf8d9cc9

> # Shielding CPUs from general execution with Cpusets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Reserve CPUs for real-time workloads with Cpusets
```

> # Shielding CPUs from general execution with Cpusets

Author: Added here: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/97/commits/60635e9394a7db101b73453f93a61cc9e5b647e4

> [Cpusets][kdocs_cpusets_v2] is a kernel feature that allow users to assign specific CPUs and memory nodes to a set of tasks, enabling fine-grained control over resource allocation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Cpusets][kdocs_cpusets_v2] is a kernel feature that allows users to assign specific CPUs and memory nodes to a set of tasks, enabling fine-grained control over resource allocation.
```

Author: Is it singular or plural? Because you're saying that you think it's singular and you're suggesting plural.

Reviewer 3: ... feature (singular) that allows ...

So the suggestion is correct.

Author: Done https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/97/commits/ad4572007291a790ff533a91c9c57d73124ab56b

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a paragraph explaining what shielding means, before we start using this term.

```suggestion
It also allows to exclude certain CPUs from the system scheduler. In other words excluding CPUs from use by general processes. This is called *shielding*, as it shields the CPU from being assigned work by the scheduler.
```

```{warning}

> Managing cpusets on Ubuntu 21.10 (Impish Indri) and later is no longer possible with the [cset][cset_manpage] utility. This is because `cset` utilizes cgroups v1 which is no longer supported on Ubuntu.

Author: Done here: 198908f

```

There are many ways to setup cpusets, either by manually modifying the cgroup-v2 filesystem, or using tools like [cgcreate][manpage_cgcreate], [cgexec][manpage_cgexec] and [cgclassify][manpage_cgclassify].

> 

Author: Done here: dee47d6e1abd112ba85e1d56baf9e69

On Ubuntu, cgroups are managed at a higher level by [systemd][systemd.io]. It is recommended to use this tool to configure cgroups, rather than doing it manually at a lower level.

## Runtime shielding

Shielding settings primarily depend on the number of available CPU cores.  
Before doing the shielding, let's check the number of online cpus for further comparison:
```console
$ nproc
12
```
The machine used in this example has 12 cores, but you should adjust the CPU list based on your specific use case.

It’s often useful to first test shield isolation at runtime to verify and debug its functionality before applying it persistently.

> First, it's necessary to define a slice, let's arbitrarily call it `custom-workload.slice`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe define what a slice is here, and how it's different than a shield.

Author: You do the shielding by using the `slice`, isn't different, it's a matter of using a resource that systemd provides for a specific purpose. 

The explanation of what is this systemd slice and what is the impact of it on the systemd was already added [at this line](https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/97/commits/54e0d1138f538abbac5e84cf38020c6159b470f7#diff-36e0d2f588154c7e7311ea6bcff923aba078a28abc140518d4c89c77f087999dR18)

I've added here the url for the systemd docs: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/97/commits/b4b421fda1fa181edaac75e10777dea40ba746e9

Internally, `systemd` will translate this slice to a cgroup node on the unified hierarchy of cgroup-v2.
The application to be shielded will belong to this `systemd` slice.
On this property we define the CPUs that should be isolated from general execution.
```bash
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime custom-workload.slice AllowedCPUs=11
```

Then we restrict the system units and the init scope (created by default on systemd), to use the remaining CPUs:
```bash
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime init.scope AllowedCPUs=0-10
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime system.slice AllowedCPUs=0-10
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime user.slice AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

- `init.scope`: unit where the system and the service manager itself resides.

> Being the service manager the PID 1. It's active as long the system is running.

Author: It was a complement to the first sentence, saying that this `init.scope` is the PID 1. But can be dropped.

Dropped here: aa57499

- `system.slice`: slice where all system services started by systemd are found.
- `user.slice`: the place of all user processes and services started on behalf of the user.

It's possible to check that the properties are correctly set by fetching their values with `systemctl show`, providing the unit and the desired property (with parameter `-p`). For example:

```console

> $ systemctl show custom-workload.slice -p AllowedCPUs
> AllowedCPUs=11
> $ systemctl show init.scope -p AllowedCPUs
> AllowedCPUs=0-10

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
$ systemctl show custom-workload.slice -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=11

$ systemctl show init.scope -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```
Improves the readability. Keeping just one example may be even better.

Author: Added here: 78721aa

I think it's valuable to show this constrast between the slice that is going to receive the shielding and the rest of the system. This makes clear that the shielding isn't a **truly native** systemd operation, but more a **possible setup** to be made.

```

Finally, we run our application inside a new systemd scope and assign it to the property defined earlier.
This is done by setting the scope `Slice` property to `custom-workload.slice`, ensuring that the application runs within the resource limits and constraints defined by that slice:

```bash
systemd-run --scope -p Slice=custom-workload.slice <my-app arg1 ...>
```

```{tip}
It is useful to run the systemd scope from a root shell session (using `sudo su`).
This makes sure that the application will run with proper root privileges.

```console
$ sudo su
#
# systemd-run --scope -p Slice=custom-workload.slice /home/ubuntu/my-app
Running as unit: run-rf31d22d4d34d4fdfbe0e87edf82e7621.scope; invocation ID: 91facec7c7a24c089a29d7a0080b4f1b

> ```

Reviewer 2: The tip block is not being closed. Needs to be four backticks.

Author: True, good catching on this, thanks. Added here: 1041ca2

> ```

Author: There are less wrapper processes in the middle if you run directly in the root shell.

When running with sudo from the user shell:
```console
$ ps -aux | grep application
root        2701  0.0  0.0  17132  6912 pts/0    S+   14:24   0:00 sudo systemd-run --scope -p Slice=custom-workload.slice /home/ubuntu/application
root        2702  0.0  0.0  17132  2476 pts/1    Ss   14:24   0:00 sudo systemd-run --scope -p Slice=custom-workload.slice /home/ubuntu/application
root        2703  0.0  0.0   7740  3456 pts/1    S+   14:24   0:00 /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/application
ubuntu      2710  0.0  0.0   7080  2176 pts/3    S+   14:24   0:00 grep --color=auto application
```

Which is different from when you just run inside the root shell:

```console
$ ps -aux | grep application
root        2799  0.0  0.0   7740  3584 pts/1    S+   14:27   0:00 /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/application
```
So, when running directly inside the root shell, you're in an environment which is closer than how it is when you're running the application as a service (without that amount of wrapper processes). Also, since it's something to be done experimentally as I've reinforced earlier, I prefer to instruct on running in the root shell.

> ```

Reviewer 3: I understand the difference, but don't see how that is relevant in this how-to. Is it just to make the grep output cleaner (at the expense of the added explanations) or could there be a performance gains by having fewer processes on the shielded CPU?

> After setting up the CPU shielding, it is possible to check with `nproc` that the online CPUs have changed:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After setting up the CPU shielding, it is possible to check with `nproc` that the total online CPUs have changed from 12 to 11:
```

```console
$ nproc
11

> ```

Reviewer 3: I think this fits better around after line 52.

Author: Agreed, done here: 232aa04

> We can confirm that our application is running on the designated cpus by checking with [ps][ps_manpage] command:

Author: Added here: 118919f

```console
$ ps -eLo psr,comm,args,pid, | grep my-app
 11  my-app    /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/my-a    1590
```

> It's also possible to confirm using `ps` that our application is running isolated on the `cpu 11`:

Author: Done here: 5739386

 11 cpuhp/11        [cpuhp/11]                        2      81
 11 idle_inject/11  [idle_inject/11]                  2      82
 11 migration/11    [migration/11]                    2      83
 11 ksoftirqd/11    [ksoftirqd/11]                    2      84
 11 kworker/11:0H-e [kworker/11:0H-events_highp       2      86
 11 ksmd            [ksmd]                            2      96
 11 kworker/R-devfr [kworker/R-devfr]                 2     108
 11 kworker/R-scsi_ [kworker/R-scsi_]                 2     120
 11 kworker/u25:0   [kworker/u25:0]                   2     140
 11 kworker/11:1-mm [kworker/11:1-mm_percpu_wq]       2     188
 11 kworker/11:1H-k [kworker/11:1H-kblockd]           2     222
 11 kworker/11:3-cg [kworker/11:3-cgroup_destro       2     441
 11 my-app          /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/my-a    1576    1590
 11 sleep           sleep 5                        1590    1761
```

Our application `my-app` with PID `1590` is listed.
We also see a `sleep` which has a parent process ID (PPID) equal to our application.
This is because the application `my-app` consists of a bash script with a sleep command.
The other processes listed here are kernel threads.

> `cpusets` doesn't currently isolate CPUs from running kthreads.

Author: Added here:  4ebcbb6

> `cpusets` doesn't currently isolate CPUs from running kthreads.

Author: Added here: ac1f0474f9b33f8a4dade9b198987 

Referring to the kernel commit which introduced the `isolated` option for cpusets.

## Persistent shielding

The configuration set via the `systemctl set-property` command do not persist across reboots.
To make them persistent, we need to add them as configuration files under the `/etc/systemd/system` directory.

Configurations need to be in subdirectories, but these do not exist by default.
They can be created with these commands:

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/init.scope.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/
```
Then we create the files for the `init.scope`, `system.slice` and `user.slice`:

```{note}
Here we're prefixing the name of our slice with `50-` because systemd processes configuration files in lexicographical order (sorted alphabetically).
So, prefixing files with numbers ensures a predictable loading sequence.
This way, a file like `50-cpu-shielding.conf` will override settings from `10-defaults.conf` but can still be overridden by a file named `60-custom.conf`.

> ```

Author: Done here: fcecd23

- `/etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/50-cpu-shielding.conf`

In both of them add the `AllowedCPUs` property:

```
[Slice]
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

Then create a new config file for the slice that will be used by our workload:

- `/etc/systemd/system/custom-workload.slice`

Finally, add the remaining cpu to the configuration of this slice:
```
[Slice]
AllowedCPUs=11
```

After reloading the systemd daemon, the changes will take effect:
```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

Afterwards, it is possible to check the values using `systemctl show` in the same way as before.

### Creating a Service

A reliable and reproducible way to apply CPU shielding is by creating a systemd service unit.
This allows you to assign the cpuset to the service, ensuring the application runs inside the isolated `custom-workload.slice` automatically on every reboot, without any manual intervention.

Here is a simple example of how this service could look like:
```
[Unit]
Description=app demo service
After=network.target
StartLimitIntervalSec=0

[Service]
Slice=custom-workload.slice
Type=simple
Restart=always
RestartSec=1
User=root
ExecStart=/home/ubuntu/my-app

[Install]

> WantedBy=multi-user.target

Reviewer 3: May want to remove fields that aren't relevant to make sure the reader pays attention to the relevant bits.

Author: Yeah, makes sense, done here: c049313

```
The important part here is the `Slice=custom-workload.slice` which points our service to the `custom-workload.slice` that we created which has access to the isolated cpus.

> The service file should be created inside `/etc/systemd/system`.

Reviewer 3: The service file name gets mentioned only when starting the service.
```suggestion
The service file should be created inside the `/etc/systemd/system` directory, for example at `/etc/systemd/system/my-app.service`
```

Author: True, added here: 10083bc

> Now we: reload the daemon, start and enable the service:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, reload the daemon, start and enable the service:
```

Author: Done here: b61f6d1

> # Isolating CPUs from general execution with cpusets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# How to isolate CPUs from general execution with cpusets
```

I recommend rewording the header to align with other how-to guides.
and generally how-to guides should be action-oriented, "Isolate CPUs" instead of "Isolating CPUs".

[Cpusets][kdocs_cpusets_v2] is a kernel feature that allows users to assign specific CPUs and memory nodes to a set of tasks, enabling fine-grained control over resource allocation.

> It also allows to exclude certain CPUs from the system scheduler.

Reviewer: I think the overview is helpful but it's providing an overview about CPU isolation and cpusets.

It would be helpful to provide a bit of context as to why this is helpful or useful for real-time kernels.
E.g. isolate CPUs so specific cores are dedicated to critical tasks, something along those lines that is relevant to RTU.

Reviewer: It's mentioned (sort of) in this section
"The application to be isolated will belong to this `systemd` slice."

But it would be better if included in the intro.

Author: Done! 48b6f358f4e782c

In other words excluding CPUs from use by general processes.
This is called *cpu isolation*, as it **isolates** the CPU from being assigned work by the scheduler.

```{warning}
Managing cpusets on Ubuntu 21.10 (Impish Indri) and later is not possible with the [cset][cset_manpage] utility. This is because `cset` utilizes cgroups v1 which is no longer supported on Ubuntu.
```

There are many ways to setup cpusets, either by manually modifying the cgroup-v2 filesystem, or using tools like [cgcreate][manpage_cgcreate], [cgexec][manpage_cgexec] and [cgclassify][manpage_cgclassify].

On Ubuntu, cgroups are managed at a higher level by [systemd][systemd.io]. It is recommended to use this tool to configure cgroups, rather than doing it manually at a lower level.

> ## Runtime Isolation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up runtime isolation
```

Again i suggest rewording the headings to be action-oriented.
Also we advise using sentence case headings.
https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/#headings

Isolation settings primarily depend on the number of available CPU cores.

> Before doing the isolation, let's check the number of online cpus for further comparison:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before doing the isolation, check the number of online cpus for further comparison:
```

I think the language is more suited for a tutorial :) 
We can be a bit more brief in how-to guides.

```console
$ nproc
12
```
The machine used in this example has 12 cores, but you should adjust the CPU list based on your specific use case.

> It’s often useful to first test the isolation at runtime to verify and debug its functionality before applying it persistently.

Reviewer: I think this feels a bit out of place.
Maybe move it as a note alert box at the start of the "Persistent isolation" section?
As a reminder for the user that it's best to verify before going through that section.

Author: Moved here: 07b196625d1474dacfcc

Author: Moved here: 07b196625d1474dacfcc

> First, it's necessary to define a [slice][systemd_slice], let's arbitrarily call it `custom-workload.slice`.
> Internally, `systemd` will translate this slice to a cgroup node on the unified hierarchy of cgroup-v2.
> The application to be isolated will belong to this `systemd` slice.
> On this property we define the CPUs that should be isolated from general execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, define a [slice][systemd_slice] and the CPU(s) that should be isolated from general execution -- the application to be isolated will belong to this `systemd` slice.
Internally, `systemd` will translate this slice to a cgroup node on the unified hierarchy of cgroup-v2.

For example, to define a `systemd` slice named `custom-workload.slice` that is restricted to run only on CPU 11, run:
```

```bash
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime custom-workload.slice AllowedCPUs=11
```

Then we restrict the system units and the init scope (created by default on systemd), to use the remaining CPUs:
```bash
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime init.scope AllowedCPUs=0-10
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime system.slice AllowedCPUs=0-10
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime user.slice AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

- `init.scope`: unit where the system and the service manager itself resides.
- `system.slice`: slice where all system services started by systemd are found.
- `user.slice`: the place of all user processes and services started on behalf of the user.

> It's possible to check that the properties are correctly set by fetching their values with `systemctl show`, providing the unit and the desired property (with parameter `-p`). For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check that the properties are correctly set by fetching their values with `systemctl show`, providing the unit and the desired property (with parameter `-p`). For example:
```

> ```console
> $ systemctl show custom-workload.slice -p AllowedCPUs
> AllowedCPUs=11
> 
> $ systemctl show init.scope -p AllowedCPUs
> AllowedCPUs=0-10
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```console
systemctl show custom-workload.slice -p AllowedCPUs
systemctl show init.scope -p AllowedCPUs
```
````

We strongly discourage using the "$" sign. i know this is being done in other parts of the RTU doc but we should avoid it.

https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/#code-examples-in-documentation

Author: Usually, I was using it to demonstrate a command being executed in a terminal. But now that I know about the terminal role, I don't need to use it anymore.

But thanks for letting me know that the usage isn't encouraged.

Reviewer 3: This uses the `console` syntax highlighting, designed for this specific purpose. The "$" sign is not part of the command, but is rather part of the syntax. In the output, the "$" sign will have a different color and it can't be copied by selection. 

Because of that, the user can easily triple-click to grab the command. This different when using the terminal view:

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6fa0a3dc-edd7-4a78-a049-bfaf32bbec16

When using a terminal, the $ sign shows up as well so I don't see how this helps the reader. 

Terminal view does not show any copy button. This might be something to use terminal over a console.

Syntax for what is shown in the video:
````
```console
ubuntu@ubuntu:~$ systemctl show custom-workload.slice -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=11
ubuntu@ubuntu:~$ systemctl show init.scope -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

```{terminal}
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~

:input: systemctl show custom-workload.slice -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=11
:input: systemctl show init.scope -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```
````

As you see, there is much more effort needed to write a terminal block. But as a result, this ensures consistency of all the outputs. 

If we are going for a terminal, I suggest doing it consistently across all docs, not just for this one. Otherwise it will all look like a Sunday market.

Reviewer: hey @farshidtz , @locnnil ,

For the `console` style code block, the copy button copies everything in the code block, including the "$" sign.
And as you rightly mentioned, the `terminal` style block doesn't include the copy button. But it more clearly demonstrates the input vs output.

So there isn't a perfect solution here; both require copying the text selectively. I definitely agree about consistency but I think it's helpful to consider the terminal view when necessary. It is particularly helpful when you need to explain the output; even though the example output in this doc isn't too complicated.

Please keep to the `console` view for now if that is preferred for the RTU docs set for now.

> After setting up the CPU isolation, it is possible to check with `nproc` that the total online CPUs have changed from 12 to 11:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up the CPU isolation, check with `nproc` that the total online CPUs have changed from 12 to 11:
```

> ```console

Reviewer: We have a `terminal` role if you want to display the command with the output.

https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-docs-starter-pack/blob/main/docs/reference/doc-cheat-sheet-myst.md?plain=1#L246C1-L255C4

Author: Cool, thanks for letting me know!

Author: Fixed here all ocorrencies: 21000ef768

$ nproc
11
```

> Finally, we run our application inside a new systemd scope and assign it to the property defined earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, run the application inside a new `systemd` scope and assign it to the property defined earlier.
```

> This is done by setting the scope `Slice` property to `custom-workload.slice`, ensuring that the application runs within the resource limits and constraints defined by that slice:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is done by setting the scope `Slice` property to the slice defined earlier (e.g. `custom-workload.slice`), ensuring that the application runs within the resource limits and constraints defined by that slice:
```

```bash
systemd-run --scope -p Slice=custom-workload.slice <my-app arg1 ...>
```

```{tip}

> It is useful to run the systemd scope from a root shell session (using `sudo su`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is useful to run the `systemd` scope from a root shell session (using `sudo su`).
```

This makes sure that the application will run with proper root privileges.
```

```console

> $ sudo su

Reviewer: Same comment about command + output.
And avoiding the use of "$" which will be included when you copy the code from the docs.

#
# systemd-run --scope -p Slice=custom-workload.slice /home/ubuntu/my-app
Running as unit: run-rf31d22d4d34d4fdfbe0e87edf82e7621.scope; invocation ID: 91facec7c7a24c089a29d7a0080b4f1b
```

> We can confirm that our application is running on CPU 11 by checking with [ps][ps_manpage] command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm that your application is running on CPU 11 by checking with [ps][ps_manpage] command:
```

```console
$ ps -eLo psr,comm,args,pid, | grep my-app
 11  my-app    /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/my-a    1590
```

> It's also possible to confirm using `ps` that our application is running isolated on CPU 11:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's also possible to confirm using `ps` that your application is running isolated on CPU 11:
```

```console
$ ps -eLo psr,comm,args,ppid,pid, | grep '^ 11'
 11 cpuhp/11        [cpuhp/11]                        2      81
 11 idle_inject/11  [idle_inject/11]                  2      82
 11 migration/11    [migration/11]                    2      83
 11 ksoftirqd/11    [ksoftirqd/11]                    2      84
 11 kworker/11:0H-e [kworker/11:0H-events_highp       2      86
 11 ksmd            [ksmd]                            2      96
 11 kworker/R-devfr [kworker/R-devfr]                 2     108
 11 kworker/R-scsi_ [kworker/R-scsi_]                 2     120
 11 kworker/u25:0   [kworker/u25:0]                   2     140
 11 kworker/11:1-mm [kworker/11:1-mm_percpu_wq]       2     188
 11 kworker/11:1H-k [kworker/11:1H-kblockd]           2     222
 11 kworker/11:3-cg [kworker/11:3-cgroup_destro       2     441
 11 my-app          /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/my-a    1576    1590
 11 sleep           sleep 5                        1590    1761
```

> Our application `my-app` with PID `1590` is listed.
> We also see a `sleep` which has a parent process ID (PPID) equal to our application.
> This is because the application `my-app` consists of a bash script with a sleep command.
> The other processes listed here are kernel threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application `my-app` with PID `1590` is listed.
The is also an entry for `sleep` which has a parent process ID (PPID) equal to our application -- this is because the application `my-app` consists of a bash script with a sleep command.
The other processes listed here are kernel threads.
```

```{note}
At the time of writing (Kernel v6.8.0), [cpusets' implementation][kcommit_cpuset] does not isolate CPUs from running kernel threads.
```

> ## Persistent isolation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Set up persistent CPU isolation
```

> 

Reviewer: I suggest adding that 'disclaimer' about testing as a runtime setting before applying the settings in this section.

> The configuration set via the `systemctl set-property` command do not persist across reboots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration set via the `systemctl set-property` command does not persist across reboots.
```

> To make them persistent, we need to add them as configuration files under the `/etc/systemd/system` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make them persistent, add them as configuration files under the {file}`/etc/systemd/system` directory.
```

There's a "file" role in our starter pack. it helps to use those roles in case we have styling changes or what not that can be applied across the board.

Configurations need to be in subdirectories, but these do not exist by default.

> They can be created with these commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create these subdirectories by running:
```

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/init.scope.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/
```

> Then we create the files for the `init.scope`, `system.slice` and `user.slice`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then create the files for the `init.scope`, `system.slice` and `user.slice`:
```

Reviewer: this confused me a bit. are these files referring to the *.conf files?
Or some other files that are meant to be in each of these directories?

If it's for the *.conf files i suggest moving this line because you mention creating three configuration files a little further down.
Otherwise there are missing 'files' here that should have commands tied to it.

Author: These are the default systemd system slices. They are more like system properties.

The `.conf` file are related to the custom configurations being applied to these system properties.

```bash
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime custom-workload.slice AllowedCPUs=11
```

Then we restrict the system units and the init scope (created by default on systemd), to use the remaining CPUs:
```bash
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime init.scope AllowedCPUs=0-10
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime system.slice AllowedCPUs=0-10
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime user.slice AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

- `init.scope`: unit where the system and the service manager itself resides.
Being the service manager the PID 1. It's active as long the system is running.
- `system.slice`: slice where all system services started by systemd are found.
- `user.slice`: the place of all user processes and services started on behalf of the user.

It's possible to check that the properties are correctly set by fetching their values with `systemctl show`, providing the unit and the desired property (with parameter `-p`). For example:

```console
$ systemctl show custom-workload.slice -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=11
$ systemctl show init.scope -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

Finally, we run our application inside a new systemd scope and assign it to the property defined earlier.

> This is done by setting the scope Slice property to `custom-workload.slice`, ensuring that the application runs within the resource limits and constraints defined by that slice:

Author: Done here: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/97/commits/7e5e1737079fb04182d979321dbc2a6e57502250

```bash
systemd-run --scope -p Slice=custom-workload.slice <my-app arg1 ...>
```

```{tip}
Is useful to run the systemd scope from a root shell session (with `sudo su`).

> To make sure that the application will run with proper root privileges.

Author: Done here: 0b151b86572813dc5f7bf13e9ff1bc4

```

```console
$ sudo su
#
# systemd-run --scope -p Slice=custom-workload.slice /home/ubuntu/my-app
Running as unit: run-rf31d22d4d34d4fdfbe0e87edf82e7621.scope; invocation ID: 91facec7c7a24c089a29d7a0080b4f1b
```

> After setting up the cpu shielding, it is possible to check with `nproc` that the online CPUs have changed:

Author: Done here: f6a56dc9e4058050e2c222107

```console
$ ps -eLo psr,comm,args,pid, | grep my-app
 11  my-app    /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/my-a    1590
```

It's also possible to confirm using `ps` that our application is running isolated on the `cpu 11`:

```console
$ ps -eLo psr,comm,args,ppid,pid, | grep '^ 11'
 11 cpuhp/11        [cpuhp/11]                        2      81
 11 idle_inject/11  [idle_inject/11]                  2      82
 11 migration/11    [migration/11]                    2      83
 11 ksoftirqd/11    [ksoftirqd/11]                    2      84
 11 kworker/11:0H-e [kworker/11:0H-events_highp       2      86
 11 ksmd            [ksmd]                            2      96
 11 kworker/R-devfr [kworker/R-devfr]                 2     108
 11 kworker/R-scsi_ [kworker/R-scsi_]                 2     120
 11 kworker/u25:0   [kworker/u25:0]                   2     140
 11 kworker/11:1-mm [kworker/11:1-mm_percpu_wq]       2     188
 11 kworker/11:1H-k [kworker/11:1H-kblockd]           2     222
 11 kworker/11:3-cg [kworker/11:3-cgroup_destro       2     441
 11 my-app          /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/my-a    1576    1590
 11 sleep           sleep 5                        1590    1761
```

> Our application `my-app` with PID `1590` is there, and also an `sleep` which was a parent process id (PPID) equal to our application.

Author: Done here: 25581e0e798b716e9d87ecc718bdf9f0e

> This is because the application `my-app` consists in a bash script with a sleep command.

Author: Done here: 45fed8c376edd412152662714e080f367fd27

The other processes showing up there are kernel threads, unfortunately, cpusets doesn't isolate cpus from running kthreads yet.

## Persistent shielding

The configuration set via the `systemctl set-property` command do not persist across reboots.

> To persist the, we have to write them as configuration files beneath the `/etc/systemd/system` directory.

Author: Done here: 82d58445b59f2b39686f71d53c53e7

> For persistent shielding, it's necessary to create the directories which will hold the system configurations:

Author: Done here: https://github.com/canonical/real-time-ubuntu-docs/pull/97/commits/9f989e6009c271047c066198974c84444eb80b7b

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/init.scope.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/
```
Then we create the files for the `init.scope`, `system.slice` and `user.slice`:

```{note}
Here we're prefixing the name of our slice with `50-` because systemd processes configuration files in lexicographical order (sorted alphabetically).
So, prefixing files with numbers ensures a predictable loading sequence.
This way, a file like `50-cpu-shielding.conf` will override settings from `10-defaults.conf` but can still be overridden by a file named `60-custom.conf`.
```

Create the configuration file for the init scope:

- `/etc/systemd/system/init.scope.d/50-cpu-shielding.conf`

Then add the `AllowedCPUs` property to the configuration of this scope:
```
[Scope]
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

> So, create the files:

Author: Done here: 7359cb35957db33927cf0b3c137

- `/etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/50-cpu-shielding.conf`
- `/etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/50-cpu-shielding.conf`

> Add to the `AllowedCPUs` property to the configuration of these slices:

Author: Done here: a967fb2d738665a23084485bcfa252

```
[Slice]
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

> Then, we create a slice for the our workload, create the file:

Author: Done here: 48ff85c6b7cfffe93ff2c87affe7b81bc3

- `/etc/systemd/system/custom-workload.slice`

Finally, add the remaining cpu to the configuration of this slice:
```
[Slice]
AllowedCPUs=11
```

After reloading the systemd daemon, the changes will take effect:
```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

> Afterwards, is possible to check the values using `systemctl show` in the same way as before.

Author: Done here: a81ba556d56a00349a649e604

# How to isolate CPUs from general execution with cpusets

> [Cpusets][kdocs_cpusets_v2] is a kernel feature that allows users to assign specific CPUs and memory nodes to a set of tasks, enabling fine-grained control over resource allocation.
> 
> It also allows to exclude certain CPUs from the system scheduler.
> Cpusets are particularly useful for Real-Time Ubuntu, as they enable the isolation of CPUs for time-sensitive workloads.
> By creating a cpuset partition without load balancing, cpusets prevent latency jitters caused by periodic load balancing to exceed the desired
> latency limit of a certain workload.
> This ensures that real-time tasks maintain predictable execution times, which is essential for workloads requiring low latency and precise, time-critical responses.
> In other words excluding CPUs from use by general processes.
> This is called *cpu isolation*, as it **isolates** the CPU from being assigned work by the scheduler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Cpusets][kdocs_cpusets_v2] is a kernel feature that allows users to assign specific CPUs and memory nodes to a set of tasks, enabling fine-grained control over resource allocation.
It also allows to exclude certain CPUs from the system scheduler.
This is called *cpu isolation*, as it **isolates** the CPU from being assigned work by the scheduler.
In other words excluding CPUs from use by general processes.

Cpusets are particularly useful for Real-time Ubuntu, as they enable the isolation of CPUs for time-sensitive workloads.
By creating a cpuset partition without load balancing, cpusets prevent latency jitters caused by periodic load balancing to exceed the desired latency limit of a certain workload.
This ensures that real-time tasks maintain predictable execution times, which is essential for workloads requiring low latency and precise, time-critical responses.
```

I think it reads a bit smoother this way; please do review.

```{warning}
Managing cpusets on Ubuntu 21.10 (Impish Indri) and later is not possible with the [cset][cset_manpage] utility. This is because `cset` utilizes cgroups v1 which is no longer supported on Ubuntu.
```

There are many ways to setup cpusets, either by manually modifying the cgroup-v2 filesystem, or using tools like [cgcreate][manpage_cgcreate], [cgexec][manpage_cgexec] and [cgclassify][manpage_cgclassify].

On Ubuntu, cgroups are managed at a higher level by [systemd][systemd.io]. It is recommended to use this tool to configure cgroups, rather than doing it manually at a lower level.

## Configure runtime CPU isolation

Isolation settings primarily depend on the number of available CPU cores.

> Before doing the isolation, check the number of online cpus for further comparison:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before doing the isolation, check the number of online cpus for further comparison by running `nproc`. For example, the output below shows the system has 12 CPU cores.
```

For example, to define a `systemd` slice named `custom-workload.slice` that is restricted to run only on CPU 11, run:
```bash
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime custom-workload.slice AllowedCPUs=11
```

Then restrict the system units and the init scope (created by default on `systemd`), to use the remaining CPUs:
```bash
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime init.scope AllowedCPUs=0-10
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime system.slice AllowedCPUs=0-10
sudo systemctl set-property --runtime user.slice AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

- `init.scope`: unit where the system and the service manager itself resides.
- `system.slice`: slice where all system services started by systemd are found.
- `user.slice`: the place of all user processes and services started on behalf of the user.

Check that the properties are correctly set by fetching their values with `systemctl show`, providing the unit and the desired property (with parameter `-p`).

```{terminal}
   :user: ubuntu
   :host: ubuntu
   :dir: ~

:input: systemctl show custom-workload.slice -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=11
:input: systemctl show init.scope -p AllowedCPUs
AllowedCPUs=0-10
```

> After setting up the CPU isolation, check with `nproc` that the total online CPUs have changed from 12 to 11:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting up the CPU isolation, check with `nproc` that the total online CPUs have changed based on your settings (e.g. from 12 to 11):
```

How-tos are meant to be generic. Am suggesting the slight wording changes here to be a bit more specific that these are examples and not absolute values.

11 ksmd            [ksmd]                            2      96
11 kworker/R-devfr [kworker/R-devfr]                 2     108
11 kworker/R-scsi_ [kworker/R-scsi_]                 2     120
11 kworker/u25:0   [kworker/u25:0]                   2     140
11 kworker/11:1-mm [kworker/11:1-mm_percpu_wq]       2     188
11 kworker/11:1H-k [kworker/11:1H-kblockd]           2     222
11 kworker/11:3-cg [kworker/11:3-cgroup_destro       2     441
11 my-app          /bin/bash /home/ubuntu/my-a    1576    1590
11 sleep           sleep 5                        1590    1761
```

The application `my-app` with PID `1590` is listed.
The is also an entry for `sleep` which has a parent process ID (PPID) equal to our application -- this is because the application `my-app` consists of a bash script with a sleep command.
The other processes listed here are kernel threads.

```{note}
At the time of writing (Kernel v6.8.0), [cpusets' implementation][kcommit_cpuset] does not isolate CPUs from running kernel threads.
```

## Configure persistent CPU isolation

```{warning}
The machine used in this example has 12 cores, but you should adjust the CPU list based on your specific use case.

> **Disclaimer:** By following the next steps, the user is expected to have already tested and debug the settings at runtime and determined a configuration that best fits their needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before configuring persistent CPU isolation, you are recommended to have already tested and debugged the settings at runtime and determined a configuration that best fits your needs.
```

Talking to the user; not about the user.

```

The configuration set via the `systemctl set-property` command does not persist across reboots.
To make them persistent, add them as configuration files under the {file}`/etc/systemd/system` directory.

Configurations need to be in subdirectories, but these do not exist by default.
Create these subdirectories by running:

```bash
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/init.scope.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/
sudo mkdir -p /etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/
```
Then create the files for the `init.scope`, `system.slice` and `user.slice`:

```{note}

> We will prefix the name of the configuration files with `50-` because systemd processes the files in lexicographical order (sorted alphabetically).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the examples here, we prefix the name of the configuration files with `50-` because systemd processes the files in lexicographical order (sorted alphabetically).
```

Prefixing files with numbers ensures a predictable loading sequence.
This way, a file like `50-cpu-isolation.conf` will override settings from `10-defaults.conf` but can still be overridden by a file named `60-custom.conf`.
```

Now that the directories are available, create the following three configuration files:
- `/etc/systemd/system/init.scope.d/50-cpu-isolation.conf` for the init scope with the following content:

> ```
> [Scope]
> AllowedCPUs=0-10
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  ```
  [Scope]
  AllowedCPUs=0-10
  ```
````

The indentation is not aligned with the bullet point.

- `/etc/systemd/system/system.slice.d/50-cpu-isolation.conf` and `/etc/systemd/system/user.slice.d/50-cpu-isolation.conf` with the following:

> ```
> [Slice]
> AllowedCPUs=0-10
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  ```
  [Slice]
  AllowedCPUs=0-10
  ```
````

> Finally, create a new config file for the slice that will be used by our workload, with the remaining CPU. Add the following to `/etc/systemd/system/custom-workload.slice`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, create a new config file for the slice that will be used by your workload, with the remaining CPU. Add the following to `/etc/systemd/system/custom-workload.slice`:
```

> 

Reviewer: If you prefer to leave a blank line before the code blocks, please update the rest of the bullet points to be consistent.
Thanks.

> ```
> [Slice]
> AllowedCPUs=11
> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  ```
  [Slice]
  AllowedCPUs=11
  ```
````

After reloading the systemd daemon, the changes will take effect:
```bash
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
```

Afterwards, it is possible to check the values using `systemctl show` in the same way as before.

> ### Creating a Service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a service
```

A reliable and reproducible way to apply CPU isolation is by creating a systemd service unit.
This allows you to assign the cpuset to the service, ensuring the application runs inside the isolated `custom-workload.slice` automatically on every reboot, without any manual intervention.

Here is a simple example of how this service could look like:
```
[Unit]
Description=app demo service

[Service]
Slice=custom-workload.slice
ExecStart=/home/ubuntu/my-app

```

> The important part here is the `Slice=custom-workload.slice` which points our service to the `custom-workload.slice` that we created which has access to the isolated cpus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The important part here is the `Slice=custom-workload.slice` which points your service to the `custom-workload.slice` that you created which has access to the isolated cpus.
```

> The important part here is the `Slice=custom-workload.slice` which points our service to the `custom-workload.slice` that we created which has access to the isolated cpus.

Reviewer: I think there was another feedback on this from @jpm-canonical .
Please update any mention of "CPUs" to be consistent in terms of capitalization. I think "CPUs" would be good since "CPU" is an acronym and is typically capitalized to begin with.

Thanks.

> The service file should be created inside the `/etc/systemd/system` directory, for example at `/etc/systemd/system/my-app.service`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The service file should be created inside the `/etc/systemd/system` directory, for example at `/etc/systemd/system/my-app.service`.
```
